student protesters at Columbia
University have been given an ultimatum
leave or face suspension they were given
a 2 pm. deadline which is now just
passed hundreds of students have been
arrested at universities across the
United States as protests grow over
Israel's war on Gaza they're demanding
educational institutions divesting
companies they say are complicit in
genocide while we have teams of
correspondents covering the protests in
the US Phil is at the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology in Cambridge
Shia britans will have the latest from
George Washington University in the US
capital Christen salumi is at Yale
University Heidi Joe Castro is at Texas
University in Austin but first let's
speak to Teresa B she joins us now live
from Columbia University in New York
where it all began and the deadline has
come and gone what are you
[Music]
seeing well we have just been allowed in
inside the campus we were waiting for
hours outside and media are being
allowed inside the campus for 2 hours
each day I'm not sure if you can see
right behind me that's where the
encampment currently is there's hundreds
of students that are there right now
they say they want to shed light on what
is happening in Gaza they want
University this University to stop its
Investments on companies that are
profiting from the war in Gaza they say
that they will remain there we're going
to have to see there's an escalating
situation we've been seeing lots of
police uh coming uh towards University
outside we do not know whether there's
going to be an attempt to remove the
students here by force that's what many
of the students are fearing we're
hearing that they've been given some
piece of paper that they have to sign in
that paper it says that they need to
identify themselves sign that paper so
that they can end this semester in peace
however we're just hearing also from
them that they're saying that Colombia
University is fabricating a state of
emergency to suspend expel and evict
hundreds of students so you can hear
them singing and chanting right behind
me we heard a statement from the
president of Colombia University earlier
today she says that the university is
trying to solve this problem peacefully
she says that they're trying to
guarantee freedom of expression that is
extremely important in this country but
at the same time allow the Jewish
students in this University to feel safe
she also says that the university won't
divest from Israel that they're willing
to hear proposals from the students
about what to do with University
investment however they're saying that
at this point that is not something that
is going to happen it's important what
is happening here right now because many
of the students are saying that this is
an act what they're doing here right now
is an act of Civil Disobedience there's
a long tradition in US campuses and
universities of them taking to the
streets taking to universities such as
this ones to express themselves back
from the 1970s during the Vietnam War
what people here are saying that this
time is time to shed light on the
killings on the displacement and on the
hunger that is going on in Gaza we'll
continue to follow what goes on at
Columbia as we also see those aerial
shots with you Theresa Bo there for us
live in New York Let's cross over to
Christen salumi who's at Yale University
in New Haven Connecticut with more there
obviously very large demonstration going
on in New York what's it like where you
are very similar situation here in New
Haven Connecticut the home of Yale
University where students are also
demanding that their University
administrators disclose their
investments in Israel and divest from
them specifically here they've called
for divestment from weapons
manufacturers who may be benefiting from
the war on Gaza and already the
university here denied that request it
did so on April 17th that was shortly
after the encampment which maybe you can
see behind me in the distance here this
is as close as they'll let us get with
the camera uh that was first set up in
solidarity with the Colombia
demonstration uh at another location on
campus the university moved in after 3
days uh to clear out the students they
arrested about 44 of them uh but
yesterday they came back they came back
out there was a March in the city here
of about a thousand people and I'm told
about 250 of the demonstrators uh the
student demonstrators anyways came back
here to Yale to
reestablish this encampment and much
like the situation at Colombia they too
are facing threats of uh possible arrest
and suspension the university saying
that the students are violating policies
that are meant to uh uh policies as to
who can set up on campus and what can be
done on campus things like using
loudspeakers and so on although what
we've seen here today has been pretty
quiet and pretty calm and they aren't
blocking any of the buildings or the
entrances nevertheless the university
has said that they are in violation of
school policies and uh they are risking
rearrest arrest by being here and
possible suspension yeah it's
interesting to see what's going on in
the different areas and different
campuses around the country Kristen
salumi there at Yale University in
Connecticut thank you uh let's cross
over to shab ransi who's at George
Washington University in DC interesting
to see the fact that what Theresa Bo is
saying in New York the police may very
well uh arrive in much larger numbers uh
where she is in the coming minutes or
hours sheab acquired a protest where
Christen was but also the threat there
of police coming uh to break up the
demonstration the police where you are
have been very careful about how they've
behaved in the US capital
and that's that's the bizarre thing s
SEL that it's the university
administrators who are the ones who
supposed to you know be wanting freedom
of speech and thought and critical
engagement with the issues of the day
who are begging the police to come in
here and arrest and drag away these
students and the police are saying no
they don't want to because they don't
want the the Optics of of of of frankly
assaulting peaceful protesters there
really is an infrastructure now that's
been put down here with water and food
and librar and now we have this rather
unwitting art installation behind us and
maybe Quinn one of the the protest
organizers perhaps you could explain to
us what this this amazing the symbolic
barrier display is all about yeah so uh
these barriers they were used to keep us
in um they put them along this uh
horizontal brick pathway here and they
put us they put it along the front there
uh they had us kettled in they cut off
our bathroom access um food and water it
was all brought in from outside they
didn't provide any of it um actually in
an email they they said that that was
like a positive that they were allowing
access to food and water which is uh
strikingly similar to how the Israelis
are are messaging their their war in
Gaza but um or their genocide in Gaza
but um so when when these barriers were
broken down last night we uh decided to
take them all into a big pile and uh put
it in the center of the camp uh sort of
as a message of um like why we're here
and what we're doing uh I think it's
important that everyone fights against
occupation which is exactly what the
people in in Gaza are doing and that's
exactly what we did here yeah it is
striking that suddenly people who are
pro Israeli are against settlements
given that's uh part of the the way they
run things in the occupied territories
but why do you think the university
authorities are acting in such a or
attempting to act in such a vindictive
vindictive manner to the protesters um
yeah I think that uh the only real
parallel to this at least in America is
uh 1968 with the Vietnam War um Israel
specifically has functioned as an
extension of American imperialism since
1967 generally 1973 specifically is when
America really became the uh dominant
superpower making those decisions and
um one of our demands is to end academic
ties with the Zionist institutions and
so they don't want to do that it gives
them it's important to remember that
these tactics are not used um
specifically because it works against
Palestinians they're used specifically
because they work and uh they've simply
been been forged in in Gaza over the
last 70 80 years we we're hearing such
sort of rational discussion about the
occupation and what the Israelis are
doing in Gaza and yet you're being
presented in certainly the Western media
as a bunch of crazy anti-semitic
radicals I mean are you any of those
things I mean um no absolutely not um
we've had some some provocateurs maybe
they were counter protesters trying to
trying to do like a false flag type
thing or maybe they would just were lost
and and frankly quite stupid but we've
had anti-semitic messages and things
show up nearby they've never been in the
encampment uh they've never even been on
uh this H Street in front of us here uh
they were quickly escorted out and and
it was made very clear they weren't
welcome uh so no no one here Harbors any
sort of anti-Semitism or anything like
that is there any dialogue with
University authorities underway right
now um I am not I can't comment on that
um when I say I'm not aware of that I
mean I personally am not aware of that
not that there were no uh negotiations
I've just I'm not clued in all right
Quin thank thank you very much yeah so
still authorities do threaten the
students W with removal but the police
are saying they're not going to go in
because this is actually a peaceful
expression of students first amendment
constitutional rights we'll see how long
that lasts though indeed we will Let's
cross over to Phil lval he's live for us
at MIT in Cambridge Massachusetts and
Phil it has to be said where even where
you are uh there has been or have been
signs of Confrontation and Prov
provocation as
well yeah absolutely and we just had a
few more developments in the last few
minutes I'm not just going to tell you
we're going to show you so we're going
to zoom in you might be able to see in
the distance over there the Israeli flag
which is flying next to a US flag that
has just popped up and this is what
could be team the kind of official
counter-protest it's across the pathway
for context from the en cment that has
been set up by those uh students who've
had that encampment there for a week
we're zooming in because we're not
allowed to be on premises MIT is private
property to be made being made very
clear that journalists with cameras have
to stay away which is why we're
reporting from outside but that is very
different to what we saw just over an
hour ago where there was a what you
might describe was a popup counter
protest where almost from nowhere 30 to
40 uh Israeli supporting students
faculty members appeared from nowhere
with Israeli flag straped over them
American flags they were singing songs
about Zionism they were waving uh
banners showing pictures of some of the
hostages taken on October 7th and they
marched right into the heart of that
encampment they sat down they started
singing they were having a picnic they
at one point started walking through the
encampment when the protesters were
ignoring them uh waving these pictures
in their faces uh one of the protesters
who's been there for a week said you
know this is a real provocation but we
are ignoring them because they've done
this before and after maybe half an hour
ago they walked off and they left but
I'm going to bring my my guest here now
this is David from MIT MIT Jews for
peace what did you make of what we saw
an hour ago yeah I mean like you said
we're we're not really engaging with
them we feel very resolved in and and
why we're here and why we've been here
for over a week uh we are here to demand
MIT uh cut direct research with the
Israeli Ministry of Defense these are
these are projects like autonomous drone
swarms which uh
directly uh directly tied to the death
of of the the tens of thousands of gin
that we're seeing uh there's persistent
underwater surveillance these are just
some of the research uh projects that
are the that MIT does with the Israeli
Ministry defense and so we don't pay
them any mind we're very resolved in
what we're doing here but do they do
they have any impact on on your
negotiations because it's not you know
it's not helpful is it when that you're
trying to negotiate with the university
and these things happen yeah I mean so I
I'm not within the negotiation so I'm
not exactly sure but we're we're not
here to escalate with with other
students staff faculty at MIT we're here
to talk about the research that we do at
MIT we all grow up uh and are told that
we can do research for good for for
ethical for ethical means and and what
MIT does in their research with the
Israeli Ministry of defense is not for
ethical means how long do you think this
en CA will be here how long do you plan
to protest because it's becoming
increasingly OB increasingly obvious
that the president is trying to shut
this down now yeah I mean we'll see
we're we're going to be here until we
can have a good faith negotiation with
MIT and and and talk about the the
research that we do with the Israeli
Ministry of Defense we'll be here until
we can have those good faith discussions
David thanks very much got to draw your
attention to a few other things that are
happening around town as well because
we're not just having protests here at
MIT we've got Harvard University a few
miles away where there is another
protest that is behind locked Gates
you're not allowed on site unless you
have a Harvard pass but the chief of
police there has said he is not going to
arrest protesters just for protesting
even if the university asks him he says
they have to be violent or they have to
be causing damage to property although
the university is threatening to with
some protesters now to withhold their
degrees if they do not stop and then
we've got TFT University where they've
been told that at some point today there
will be attempts made to stop their
protest whether that means the police
move in or negotiations Advance we don't
know but we're watching that one very
closely s Hal thank you uh Phil of for
us at MIT in Cambridge Massachusetts
thank you let's cross over
the other side of the country now and to
Austin in Texas where at the University
of Texas Heidi Joe Castro is standing by
and Heidi uh obviously where you are the
university saw one of the you might say
most violent police responses that we've
seen in these past few days it must have
left an indelible mark on many people
that witnessed what
[Music]
happened that's right so H you know this
is where we saw the police on mounted
horses pushing down protesters last week
and it had been very quiet here on
campus until just about half an hour ago
when suddenly this encampment sprung up
behind me you're seeing some are UTS and
students other are community members or
other Advocate groups that have now come
on to campus and erected tents that's
behind the circle of chanters now and
they're doing this uh at the risk of the
a repeat of those images from last week
which I me mention that violent
Crackdown on protesters I want to bring
in one of the protests here this is Lea
Deca I understand you're from Austin and
you came here to make this happen to
join this why is that I actually came to
support the students and we didn't know
this was happening so it's kind of like
an impromptu action why it's happening
because there's been a genocide ongoing
for over 6 months and whether you're
Palestinian American like myself or
Palestinian without the American whether
you are black Jewish
African um Hispanic it doesn't matter
this is not okay and we want it to stop
and the universities play play a huge
part in this I saw there were police
officers standing around when this sort
of erupted a half an hour ago are there
fears that there may be another rather
harsh
Crackdown uh fears as in anticipation
perhaps fear as in fear of them doing
something to the students no because
we're here to protect our students I'm a
parent I'm here for our students safety
because what they did on Wednesday they
will not repeat and there's
administrative staff right there and he
heard the same from me so okay and we do
know that the University president is
facing a call for a no confidence vote
there's been a group of Faculty members
I believe now more than 540 who have
signed a letter calling for that why
should that happen in your eyes he has
blundered one time after another and
he's made very bad decisions and choices
and it's time to
switch this Administration up with
somebody who's actually composite and
actually cares for all students
equally and finally I want to ask you
about the accusations of anti-Semitism
Texas's Governor has said that the
students participating are anti-semitic
and he used that to justify the response
can you respond to
that um I'm Palestinian the daughter of
Palestinians who cannot go back to
Palestine and live there they can only
go visit I'm telling you Governor Abbott
you're the anti-ema we live with Jews
for many many years we have relatives
who are Jews we have friends who are
Jewish we're not anti-semitic the only
semi anti-Semitism that's coming up is
from zionists and the governor because
you don't have to be Jewish to be
Zionist unfortunately and so we've got
all kinds and so yeah we we
completely reject the idea or the notion
or the accusation that there is
anti-Semitism on this campus thank you
very much Leila uh and there's signs
here that are trying to deny that
accusation says anti-Semitism isn't the
same as Zionism that's a repeated phrase
we've been hearing here so hail but yes
it's a tense situation we're not exactly
sure what's going to happen in the next
few minutes but again protesters
University Administration police they're
all on site now we'll see how much
longer this happens this lasts indeed
we'll monitor events with you Heidi in
Texas and with all of our correspondents
at University campuses across the US in
the coming hours thank you
make sure to subscribe to our channnel
to get the latest news from Al jazer